Unit -1 (Cell) 
A cell is the basic structural and functional unit of a living organism. According to cell 
theory postulates, a cell is the basic building block of life, which makes anything alive 
and is self-suƯicient to carry out all the fundamental functions of an organism. 
What are Cell Organelles? 
The cellular components are called cell organelles. These cell organelles include both 
membrane and non-membrane bound organelles, present within the cells and are 
distinct in their structures and functions. They coordinate and function eƯiciently for the 
normal functioning of the cell. A few of them function by providing shape and support, 
whereas some are involved in the locomotion and reproduction of a cell. There are 
various organelles present within the cell and are classiﬁed into three categories 
based on the presence or absence of membrane. 
Organelles without membrane: The Cell wall, Ribosomes, and Cytoskeleton are non-
membrane-bound cell organelles. They are present both in the prokaryotic cell and the 
eukaryotic cell. 
Single membrane-bound organelles: Vacuole, Lysosome, Golgi Apparatus, 
Endoplasmic Reticulum are single membrane-bound organelles present only in a 
eukaryotic cell. 
Double membrane-bound organelles: Nucleus, mitochondria and chloroplast are 
double membrane-bound organelles present only in a eukaryotic cell. 
 cell organelles 
 
List of Cell Organelles and their Functions 

Plasma Membrane 
The plasma membrane is also termed as a Cell Membrane or Cytoplasmic Membrane. 
It is a selectively permeable membrane of the cells, which is composed of a lipid bilayer 
and proteins. 
The plasma membrane is present both in plant and animal cells. It functions as the 
selectively permeable membrane, by permitting the entry of selective materials in and 
out of the cell according to the requirement. In an animal cell, the cell membrane 
functions by providing shape and protects the inner contents of the cell. Based on 
the structure of the plasma membrane, it is regarded as the ﬂuid mosaic model. 
According to the ﬂuid mosaic model, the plasma membranes are subcellular 
structures, made of a lipid bilayer in which the protein molecules are embedded. 
Also refer to the DiƯerence Between Cell Membrane and Plasma Membrane 
Cytoplasm 
The cytoplasm is present both in plant and animal cells. They are jelly-like 
substances, found between the cell membrane and nucleus. They are mainly 
composed of water, organic and inorganic compounds. The cytoplasm is one of the 
essential components of the cell, where all the cell organelles are embedded. These 
cell organelles contain enzymes, mainly responsible for controlling all metabolic 
activity taking place within the cell and are the site for most of the chemical reactions 
within a cell. 
Nucleus 
 
The nucleus is a double-membraned organelle found in all eukaryotic cells. It is the 
largest organelle, which functions as the control centre of the cellular activities and is 
the storehouse of the cell’s DNA. By structure, the nucleus is dark, round, surrounded 
by a nuclear membrane. It is a porous membrane (like cell membrane) and forms a wall 

between cytoplasm and nucleus. Within the nucleus, there are tiny spherical bodies 
called nucleolus. It also carries an essential structure called chromosomes. 
Chromosomes are thin and thread-like structures which carry another important 
structure called a gene. Genes are a hereditary unit in organisms i.e., it helps in the 
inheritance of traits from one generation (parents) to another (oƯspring). Hence, the 
nucleus controls the characters and functions of cells in our body. The primary function 
of the nucleus is to monitor cellular activities including metabolism and growth by 
making use of DNA’s genetic information. Nucleoli in the nucleus are responsible for the 
synthesis of protein and RNA. 
Endoplasmic Reticulum 
The Endoplasmic Reticulum is a network of membranous canals ﬁlled with ﬂuid. They 
are the transport system of the cell, involved in transporting materials throughout the 
cell. 
There are two diƯerent types of Endoplasmic Reticulum: 
1. Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum – They are composed of cisternae, tubules, and 
vesicles, which are found throughout the cell and are involved in protein 
manufacture. 
2. Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum – They are the storage organelle, associated 
with the production of lipids, steroids, and also responsible for detoxifying the 
cell. 
Also, read about Endoplasmic Reticulum 
Mitochondria 
 
Mitochondria are called the powerhouses of the cell as they produce energy-rich 
molecules for the cell. The mitochondrial genome is inherited maternally in several 
organisms. It is a double membrane-bound, sausage-shaped organelle, found in almost 
all eukaryotic cells. 

The double membranes divide its lumen into two distinct aqueous compartments. The 
inner compartment is called a ‘matrix’ which is folded into cristae whereas the outer 
membrane forms a continuous boundary with the cytoplasm. They usually vary in their 
size and are found either round or oval in shape. Mitochondria are the sites of aerobic 
respiration in the cell, produces energy in the form of ATP and helps in the 
transformation of the molecules. 
For instance, glucose is converted into adenosine triphosphate – ATP. Mitochondria 
have their own circular DNA, RNA molecules, ribosomes (the 70s), and a few other 
molecules that help in protein synthesis. 
Also read about Mitochondria 
Plastids 
Plastids are large, membrane-bound organelles which contain pigments. Based on the 
type of pigments, plastids are of three types: 
 
 
Chloroplasts – Chloroplasts are double membrane-bound organelles, 
which usually vary in their shape – from a disc shape to spherical, discoid, oval 
and ribbon. They are present in mesophyll cells of leaves, which store 
chloroplasts and other carotenoid pigments. These pigments are responsible for 
trapping light energy for photosynthesis. The inner membrane encloses a space 
called the stroma. Flattened disc-like chlorophyll-containing structures known 
as thylakoids are arranged in a stacked manner like a pile of coins. Each pile is 
called a granum (plural: grana) and the thylakoids of diƯerent grana are 
connected by ﬂat membranous tubules known as stromal lamella. Just like the 
mitochondrial matrix, the stroma of chloroplast also contains a double-stranded 
circular DNA, 70S ribosomes, and enzymes which are required for the synthesis 
of carbohydrates and proteins. 

 
Chromoplasts – The chromoplasts include fat-soluble, carotenoid pigments like 
xanthophylls, carotene, etc. which provide the plants with their characteristic 
color – yellow, orange, red, etc. 
 
Leucoplasts – Leucoplasts are colorless plastids which store nutrients. 
Amyloplasts store carbohydrates (like starch in potatoes), aleuroplasts store 
proteins, and elaioplasts store oils and fats. 
Ribosomes 
 
Ribosomes are non membrane-bound and important cytoplasmic organelles found in 
close association with the endoplasmic reticulum. Ribosomes are found in the form of 
tiny particles in a large number of cells and are mainly composed of 2/3rd of RNA and 
1/3rd of protein. They are named as the 70s (found in prokaryotes) or 80s (found in 
eukaryotes) The letter S refers to the density and the size, known as Svedberg’s Unit. 
Both 70S and 80S ribosomes are composed of two subunits. Ribosomes are either 
encompassed within the endoplasmic reticulum or are freely traced in the cell’s 
cytoplasm. Ribosomal RNA and Ribosomal proteins are the two components that 
together constitute ribosomes. The primary function of the ribosomes includes protein 
synthesis in all living cells that ensure the survival of the cell. 
Golgi Apparatus 
Golgi Apparatus is also termed as Golgi Complex. It is a membrane-bound organelle, 
which is mainly composed of a series of ﬂattened, stacked pouches called cisternae. 
This cell organelle is primarily responsible for transporting, modifying, and packaging 
proteins and lipids to targeted destinations. Golgi Apparatus is found within the 
cytoplasm of a cell and is present in both plant and animal cells. 
 

Microbodies 
 
Microbodies are membrane-bound, minute, vesicular organelles, found in both plant 
and animal cells. They contain various enzymes and proteins and can be visualized 
only under the electron microscope. 
Also read about Microbodies 
Cytoskeleton 
It is a continuous network of ﬁlamentous proteinaceous structures that run throughout 
the cytoplasm, from the nucleus to the plasma membrane. It is found in all living cells, 
notably in the eukaryotes. The cytoskeleton matrix is composed of diƯerent types of 
proteins that can divide rapidly or disassemble depending on the requirement of the 
cells. The primary functions include providing the shape and mechanical resistance to 
the cell against deformation, the contractile nature of the ﬁlaments helps in motility 
during cytokinesis. 
Cilia and Flagella 
 
Cilia are hair-like projections, small structures, present outside the cell wall and work 
like oars to either move the cell or the extracellular ﬂuid. Flagella are slightly bigger and 
are responsible for the cell movements. The eukaryotic ﬂagellum structurally diƯers 
from its prokaryotic counterpart. The core of the cilium and ﬂagellum is called an 
axoneme, which contains nine pairs of gradually arranged peripheral microtubules and 
a set of central microtubules running parallel to the axis. The central tubules are 
interconnected by a bridge and are embedded by a central sheath. One of the 
peripheral microtubular pairs is also interconnected to the central sheath by a radial 

spoke. Hence there are a total of 9 radial spokes. The cilia and ﬂagella emerge from 
centriole-like structures called basal bodies. 
Centrosome and Centrioles 
 
The centrosome organelle is made up of two mutually perpendicular structures known 
as centrioles. Each centriole is composed of 9 equally spaced peripheral ﬁbrils of 
tubulin protein, and the ﬁbril is a set of interlinked triplets. The core part of the centriole 
is known as a hub and is proteinaceous. The hub connects the peripheral ﬁbrils via 
radial spoke, which is made up of proteins. The centrioles from the basal bodies of the 
cilia and ﬂagella give rise to spindle ﬁbres during cell division. 
Vacuoles 
Vacuoles are mostly deﬁned as storage bubbles of irregular shapes which are found in 
cells. They are ﬂuid-ﬁlled organelles enclosed by a membrane. The vacuole stores the 
food or a variety of nutrients that a cell might need to survive. In addition to this, it also 
stores waste products. The waste products are eventually thrown out by vacuoles. Thus, 
the rest of the cell is protected from contamination. The animal and plant cells have 
diƯerent size and number of vacuoles. Compared to the animals, plant cells have larger 
vacuoles.